feat(ai-cookbooks): Github Copilot BYOK recipe (#5616)
Kong/developer.konghq.com: app/_cookbooks/github-copilot-byok.md

url: "/cookbooks/github-copilot-byok/"
content_type: cookbook
layout: cookbook
products:
  - ai-gateway
tools:
  - kongctl
canonical: true
works_on:
  - konnect
min_version:
  gateway: '3.14'
categories:
  - llm
  - access-control
featured: false
popular: false

# Machine-readable fields for AI agent setup
plugins:
  - pre-function
  - key-auth
  - ai-proxy-advanced
  - ai-rate-limiting-advanced
requires_embeddings: false
providers:
  - openai
  - azure
  - bedrock
extra_services:
  - name: GitHub Copilot Business or Enterprise
    env_vars: []
    hint: "Each developer needs a GitHub Copilot Business or Enterprise seat, and the org administrator must enable the 'Bring Your Own Language Model Key in VS Code' Copilot policy plus Editor Preview Features. See the GitHub Copilot section in Prerequisites."

hint: "Requires GitHub Copilot Business or Enterprise seats, VS Code 1.122 or later, an admin who can enable the BYOK Copilot policy, and one LLM provider credential (OpenAI, Azure OpenAI, or AWS Bedrock)."

prereqs:
  skip_product: true
  skip_tool: true
  inline:
    - title: "{{site.konnect_product_name}}"
      content: |

>         This tutorial uses {{site.konnect_product_name}}. The [quickstart script](https://get.konghq.com/quickstart) provisions a recipe-scoped Control Plane and local Data Plane.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        This tutorial uses {{site.konnect_product_name}}. The [quickstart script](https://get.konghq.com/quickstart) provisions a recipe-scoped control plane and local data plane.
```

        1. Create a new personal access token by opening the [Konnect PAT page](https://cloud.konghq.com/global/account/tokens) and selecting **Generate Token**.
        1. Export your token. The same token is reused later for kongctl commands:

           ```bash
           export KONNECT_TOKEN='YOUR_KONNECT_PAT'
           ```

>         1. Set the recipe-scoped Control Plane name and run the quickstart script. The `-e` flags raise the data plane's nginx body buffer so Copilot's large request payloads (full conversation context, tool definitions, file contents) stay in memory instead of spilling to disk:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        1. Set the recipe-scoped control plane name and run the quickstart script. The `-e` flags raise the data plane's nginx body buffer so Copilot's large request payloads (full conversation context, tool definitions, file contents) stay in memory instead of spilling to disk:
```

           ```bash
           export KONNECT_CONTROL_PLANE_NAME='github-copilot-byok-recipe'
           curl -Ls https://get.konghq.com/quickstart | \
             bash -s -- -k $KONNECT_TOKEN \
               -e KONG_NGINX_HTTP_CLIENT_BODY_BUFFER_SIZE=16m \
               -e KONG_NGINX_HTTP_CLIENT_MAX_BODY_SIZE=16m \
               --deck-output
           ```

>            This provisions a {{site.konnect_product_name}} Control Plane named `github-copilot-byok-recipe`, a local Data Plane connected to it, and prints `export` lines for the rest of the session vars. Paste those into your shell when prompted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
           This provisions a {{site.konnect_product_name}} control plane named `github-copilot-byok-recipe`, a local data plane connected to it, and prints `export` lines for the rest of the session vars. Paste those into your shell when prompted.
```

Reviewer: I'm seeing a few more uppercase "Control Plane" and "Data Plane", so just make sure to fix those.

           export DECK_AZURE_DEPLOYMENT_ID='your-deployment-name'
           export DECK_AZURE_API_VERSION='2024-10-21'
           ```
        {% endnavtab %}
        {% navtab "AWS Bedrock" %}
        This tutorial uses [AWS Bedrock](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/bedrock/):

        1. Ensure you have an AWS account with [Bedrock model access](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/bedrock/latest/userguide/model-access.html) enabled for the chat model you plan to use.
        1. Create decK variables with your AWS credentials:

           ```bash
           export DECK_AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID='your-access-key'
           export DECK_AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY='your-secret-key'
           export DECK_AWS_REGION='us-east-1'
           ```
        {% endnavtab %}
        {% endnavtabs %}

overview: |
  This recipe puts {{site.ai_gateway_name}} in front of an LLM provider so every
  GitHub Copilot Chat and agent request from your engineering team flows through a
  control point you own. Kong holds the provider API key and injects it server-side,
  authenticates each developer with a Consumer-scoped credential, normalizes the
  request body so reasoning models accept it, and attributes every token to a named

>   developer in {{site.konnect_short_name}} Analytics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  developer in {{site.konnect_short_name}} {{site.observability}}
```

  The recipe configures Copilot's
  [Bring Your Own Key (BYOK) Custom Endpoint](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/copilot/customization/language-models)
  in VS Code to post to a Kong Route at `/github-copilot/v1/chat/completions`, then
  uses four Kong Plugins on that Route: the [Pre-function](/plugins/pre-function/)
  Plugin to normalize the request, the [Key Auth](/plugins/key-auth/) Plugin to
  authenticate each developer, the [AI Proxy Advanced](/plugins/ai-proxy-advanced/)
  Plugin to inject the provider key and forward the request, and the
  [AI Rate Limiting Advanced](/plugins/ai-rate-limiting-advanced/) Plugin to enforce

>   per-Consumer token budgets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  uses four Kong plugins on that Route: 
    * The [Pre-function](/plugins/pre-function/)
  plugin to normalize the request
    * The [Key Auth](/plugins/key-auth/) plugin to
  authenticate each developer, 
    * The [AI Proxy Advanced](/plugins/ai-proxy-advanced/) plugin to inject the provider key and forward the request
    * The [AI Rate Limiting Advanced](/plugins/ai-rate-limiting-advanced/) plugin to enforce
  per-Consumer token budgets
```

  Scope: this recipe governs Copilot Chat and agent traffic (the Chat view, agent
  modes, and Copilot CLI). Inline ghost-text code completions always run on
  GitHub's infrastructure and cannot be proxied through Kong, regardless of the
  Custom Endpoint setting.
---

## The problem

> Routing GitHub Copilot through a central control point breaks down on three independent fronts at once. Each one is a real wall teams hit; together they are why naive provider-credential reuse falls apart.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Routing GitHub Copilot through a central control point breaks down on three independent fronts at once. Each one is a real wall teams hit; together they are why provider-credential reuse falls apart.
```

**Credentials live on developer machines.** A team that enables Copilot BYOK without a gateway distributes provider API keys directly to every engineer through 1Password, shell profiles, or chat. Every request is indistinguishable on the provider bill, every leaked key is a fleet-wide rotation, and there is no way to revoke one developer without touching everyone.

**Copilot pins request fields that some upstreams reject.** VS Code's Custom Endpoint client posts requests with `temperature: 0.1` hard-coded into the body, and Copilot's BYOK schema does not expose a field for changing it. When the upstream is a reasoning model (gpt-5 family, o-series), the provider returns:

```text
400 ... 'temperature' does not support 0.1 ... Only the default (1) value is supported
```
{:.no-copy-code}

> There is nowhere in VS Code's BYOK configuration to fix this. The request has to be normalized at the gateway.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can't fix this in VS Code's BYOK configuration. The request has to be normalized at the gateway.
```

```text
400 "cannot use own model - must be: gpt-5-mini"
```
{:.no-copy-code}

This is enforced by GitHub's policy layer, not by the LLM provider or by Kong. It means the model ID a developer types into VS Code (`models[].id` in the BYOK config) has to match the org's allowlist, regardless of what model Kong actually forwards to upstream.

**No per-developer attribution.** Even when traffic reaches the provider, the bill is a single line item. There is no built-in way to see which developer used how many tokens, which model, or how often a developer is approaching the team's monthly budget. Cost decisions become retroactive.

The root issue is that trust, normalization, and accounting all need to happen on a server you control before the request hits the provider. That control point is what this recipe builds.

## The solution

This recipe puts {{site.base_gateway}} between VS Code and the LLM provider so every Copilot Chat or agent request flows through a server you control:

> - **Developers never hold the provider key.** Kong holds it and injects it server-side. Each developer authenticates to Kong with their own short-lived Consumer credential, which is the value they paste into VS Code's `apiKey` field. Rotating one developer is a single deck-config change; rotating the provider key is also one change, not a fleet-wide push.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Developers never hold the provider key.** Kong holds it and injects it server-side. Each developer authenticates to Kong with their own short-lived Consumer credential, which is the value they paste into VS Code's `apiKey` field. Rotating one developer is a single decK-config change; rotating the provider key is also one change, not a fleet-wide push.
```

> - **Per-Consumer attribution.** Every request is attributed to a named Consumer in {{site.konnect_short_name}} Analytics, so cost, token usage, and model mix can be sliced per developer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Per-Consumer attribution.** Every request is attributed to a named Consumer in {{site.konnect_short_name}} {{site.observability}}, so cost, token usage, and model mix can be sliced per developer.
```

- **Org-allowlist alignment.** The Kong target's `model_alias` is parameterized by `DECK_CHAT_MODEL`, so the same env var pins both the name VS Code sends and the name Kong matches against. If the org policy mandates `gpt-5-mini`, you set the env var to `gpt-5-mini`, and the VS Code `id` field uses the same value. Kong's `model.name` independently controls what is actually sent upstream.

<!-- vale off -->
{% mermaid %}
sequenceDiagram
    participant VS as VS Code Copilot
    participant K as Kong Gateway
    participant L as LLM Provider

    VS->>K: POST /github-copilot/v1/chat/completions<br/>Authorization: Bearer &lt;apiKey&gt;<br/>body: {model, messages, temperature: 0.1}
    activate K
    K->>K: pre-function (Bearer to apikey, strip temperature)
    K->>K: key-auth (validate apikey, attach Consumer)
    K->>K: ai-proxy-advanced (alias match, inject provider key)
    K->>K: ai-rate-limiting-advanced (per-Consumer token budget)
    K->>L: Forwarded request (provider auth + normalized body)
    activate L
    L-->>K: Provider response
    deactivate L
    K-->>VS: OpenAI-format response (+ X-AI-RateLimit headers)
    deactivate K
{% endmermaid %}
<!-- vale on -->

> {% table %}

Reviewer: This needs one sentence of lead in text

columns:
  - title: Component
    key: component
  - title: Responsibility
    key: responsibility
rows:
  - component: "VS Code GitHub Copilot extension"
    responsibility: "Posts Chat and agent requests to the Custom Endpoint URL using the OpenAI Chat Completions API shape."

>   - component: "Kong, [Pre-function](/plugins/pre-function/) Plugin"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - component: "Kong, [Pre-function](/plugins/pre-function/) plugin"
```
Nitpick, but "plugin" should be lowercase throughout.

**`strategy: local`** keeps counters in memory on each Kong node. Fine for single-node and development. For multi-node production, switch to `strategy: redis` with a shared Redis instance so counters stay consistent across nodes.

**`llm_format: openai`** must match the AI Proxy Advanced Plugin's `llm_format` so the rate limiter parses token counts from the response correctly.

Kong returns token rate-limit headers with every response:

{% table %}
columns:
  - title: Header
    key: header
  - title: Description
    key: description
rows:
  - header: "`X-AI-RateLimit-Limit-{window}-{provider}`"
    description: "Maximum tokens allowed in the window."
  - header: "`X-AI-RateLimit-Remaining-{window}-{provider}`"
    description: "Tokens remaining in the current window."
  - header: "`X-AI-RateLimit-Reset`"
    description: "Seconds until the quota is restored."
  - header: "`X-AI-RateLimit-Retry-After`"
    description: "Seconds clients should wait before retrying after a `429` response."
{% endtable %}

When the token limit is exceeded, Kong returns `429 Too Many Requests` with a `Retry-After` header.

{:.info}

> > In production, store provider credentials in [Kong Vaults](/gateway/secrets-management/) using {%raw%}`{vault://backend/key}`{%endraw%} references rather than environment variables. Kong supports HashiCorp Vault, AWS Secrets Manager, GCP Secret Manager, and the Konnect Config Store. Per-developer Consumer credentials are also good vault candidates as the team scales beyond a handful of seats.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> In production, store provider credentials in [Kong Vaults](/gateway/secrets-management/) using {%raw%}`{vault://backend/key}`{%endraw%} references rather than environment variables. Kong supports HashiCorp Vault, Azure, AWS Secrets Manager, GCP Secret Manager, and the Konnect Config Store. Per-developer Consumer credentials are also good vault candidates as the team scales beyond a handful of seats.
```
I'm not sure why Azure was omitted.

1. **Strip stray characters from the key.** Copy the value with `printf '%s' "$DECK_COPILOT_KEY_ALICE"`. zsh's trailing `%` marker for newline-less output is a common silent-401 source.

### Dashboard is empty after a few minutes

If **Observability → Custom dashboards → `Copilot Usage`** shows no data 5+ minutes after a successful request, work outward from the data plane:

1. **Confirm requests reached the data plane.** Tail `docker logs` on the Kong container and trigger a Copilot prompt; you should see access-log lines for `POST /github-copilot/v1/chat/completions`. If the access log is silent, the request never left VS Code or never hit Kong — fix the client side first.

1. **Confirm the data plane is reporting to Konnect telemetry.** A data plane that was relaunched (for example, recreated with new env vars) sometimes fails to reconnect to the telemetry endpoint:

   {% raw %}
   ```bash
   docker logs $(docker ps --filter ancestor=kong/kong-gateway --format '{{.Names}}') 2>&1 \
     | grep -iE 'telemetry|cluster_telemetry|connected to.*tp\.konghq'
   ```
   {% endraw %}

>    A healthy node shows a successful connection to `<region>.tp.konghq.com:443`. Repeated TLS or DNS errors mean telemetry is silently dropping; restart the container and re-check.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   A healthy node shows a successful connection to `{region}.tp.konghq.com:443`. Repeated TLS or DNS errors mean telemetry is silently dropping; restart the container and re-check.
```
